Prison-free colonies?

Perhaps Adelaide's most salient distinction among Australian cities is for bucking the trend of being founded by convicts. Unlike the penal colonies of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, and Hobart, Adelaide was a planned city founded by free men. The city was designed by the British Colonel William Light in what is known as “Light’s Vision”. Light’s vision was one of free men and women living in a society of civil and religious liberties. The vision was so pure that it was thought there would be no need for a jail, and none were created when Adelaide was formally established in December of 1836.

The theory behind this vision is very interesting and perhaps an important lesson. The idea was that the residents would be inherently “better” people than those at the penal colony, and would thus not commit crime. Similar ideas have been tried in many places, including New Harmony, Indiana, a town in Southern Indiana. Soon after the establishment of Adelaide, newcomers started arriving, and the fear of escaped convicts began. This, combined with some crimes in spring of 1837 were enough for the government to start collecting money for the first jail, less than a year after the city’s founding. The following year, the progenitor to the South Australian Police was created. This is not to say that the experiment failed entirely, but it certainly did fail in the belief that the city would not need a police force or jails.



Similarly, in New Harmony, Indiana, immediately after establishment outsiders started arriving and the dream of a crime-free utopia quickly collapsed. So the question is, is such a crime-free society possible? As far as I can tell, there has never truly been one for an extended period of time (many, like Adelaide, appear to give up on not having prisons within a few months). The main reason cited for these failures, especially by those who designed them, is that outsiders arrived and ruined the whole thing. But what would happen without outside intervention, would it even work in that case? [Seems like kind of a trite question, although you might gain some insight by looking at the results of some of the Biosphere experiments.].

Will there be a prison on a Martian colony? If humans ever do colonize Mars, will there be any way to prevent crime from occurring there. too? This will be the perfect experiment, as only people specifically invited will be able to live there. and there will be no escaped convicts flying their own microjets there. Another example of only specifically selected people living together is on the International Space Station (ISS). Although there has never been a significant incident on the ISS, NASA has guidelines on what to do if an astronaut becomes unstable. According to NASA’s official guidance, the first step is to restrain them with duct tape. If they need to be further restrained, there are bungee cords onboard to tie them down. Finally, there are tranquilizers onboard the ISS right now, both oral ones if they are willing and syringes if they aren’t. These have never been used and NASA screens for possible signs of mental instability by having psychologists interview the astronauts twice a month. Admittedly, this is an unlikely scenario and you’d think that NASA, in their incredibly intense application process, would be able to remove any potential criminals or unstable people from their selection of under 500 astronauts in total. But you would be wrong.

On February 5th, 2007, NASA astronaut Lisa Nowak was arrested for attempted kidnapping of the girlfriend of another astronaut with whom she had been romantically involved. This was an astronaut who had been selected through one of the most arduous screening processes ever in existence. There will almost certainly need to be some sort of detention center on a Martian colony.
